# Understanding Australia's Changing Ecosystems: Linking Long Term Satellite Image and Field Survey Archives #

The aim of this research program will build and pilot test a capability to separate natural and human induced environmental changes, and to assess the impacts of environmental management activities. This will build on pioneering work in by P.Scarth using Google’s Earth Engine (GEE) for processing surface land cover, along with specialised Open Data Kit (ODK) approaches for real time data collection and publishing through [Australia’s TERN project](http://www.tern.org.au). Addressing this aim will significantly advance Australian and global ecosystem science and management capabilities. The proposed approach will move environmental monitoring from looking at carefully selected, but small areas intensively in annual long term vegetation surveys, to examining regional and continental scale maps of the same field measurements, collected monthly and over a 40 year period. By integrating [ODK](http://opendatakit.org/) and MapsEngine we will refine real time field data collection and interrogation, for calibration and validation of satellite image based products, along with more effective storage and integration. The research will enable a repeatable means to produce essential baseline maps of vegetative environmental properties at scales suited to local, regional and state environmental monitoring. The interactive maps can be used to assess changes in a historic context, or current conditions can be compared to long term characteristics or recent trends.

## Goals and Problem Statement ##
The goal of this work is to complete a pilot project linking long term (up to 40 years) of regularly (monthly) collected satellite image data sets and concurrent ecosystem field survey data for vegetation, to measure, map and understand how Australian ecosystems, specifically their vegetation, have changed, and are continuing to change. Building this capability links together recently established capabilities in [Phinn’s research group](http://www.gpem.uq.edu.au/brg), his state government research and development to operations projects [(Joint Remote Sensing Research Program](http://www.gpem.uq.edu.au/jrsrp) - Scarth], links to [CSIRO’s earth observation activities](http://www.csiro.au/Organisation-Structure/Divisions/Land-and-Water/Environmental-Earth-Observation.aspx) (Held), and leading [long term survey work](http://portal.tern.org.au/) done by key Australian ecological research groups. The work will address questions of how has the vegetation composition and structure of selected Australian ecosystems changed over the past 40 years, and to what extent this was due to natural events or human activities. The work will provide new knowledge and methods urgently required by all levels of Australian Governments to support Local, State and National environmental management responsibilities, for mapping and identifying potential causes of change to Australia's ecosystems.

## Project Description with Project Plan and Timeline ##
Globally, and in Australia, satellite image archives spanning the past 20-30 years are being made publicly available at no cost, in formats that can be easily used for a number of applications. However, these archives lack two critical elements that would enable their use in a much larger range of ecosystem science and management activities:
  1. direct linkage and validation with ecologically and management relevant environmental parameters; and
  1. time-series analysis tools that work across spatially (maps) and temporally (collected every month for 40 years) dense data sets. The data included in these archives are the moderate spatial resolution (70 m – 30 m pixels) sensors on the Landsat satellites of from 1972 – present, and the coarser spatial resolution (1 km pixels) MODIS and AVHRR sensors, from 2001 and 1979 respectively.

In some cases the data are provided as an image, i.e. measurements of the amount of light/energy reflected, absorbed or emitted, and in some cases the data are processed to “biophysical maps” where each pixel has either:
  1. a label of what type of feature, e.g. vegetation community type; or
  1. an estimated value, e.g. above ground biomass.

The Joint Remote Sensing Research Program (JRSRP) which Phinn and Scarth drive has helped to establish an online fully corrected Landsat image archive for eastern Australia. In addition, JRSRP has established an initial set of time series analysis tools for application to image archives to identify changes and detect trends in environmental properties over time, such as vegetation cover, and to map and analyse dense time series of land-cover maps. The intent of this proposal is to build on JRSRP’s initial time series tools developed by Scarth so they can be used to address the three main limitations of long-term satellite image archive analysis:
  1. direct linkage and validation with ecologically and management relevant environmental parameters; and
  1. time-series analysis tools that work across spatially (maps) and temporally (collected every month for 40 years) dense data sets.

This will be done by addressing the following question: **_How can combined satellite image maps and field survey data be used to detect changes in vegetation composition, condition and structure produced by natural and human activities at time scales of month to decades?_**

The tasks for this proposed project will be undertaken in a demonstration mode for select sites in eastern Australia where both long term Landsat archive data and annual field survey data from TERN’s long term ecological research network sites (www.ltern.org.au ) are available. A core group of project staff, including the applicant, PI Scarth and Held, and key staff from the TERN long term ecological research network (D.Lindenmayer, G.Wardle and C.Dickman) will work with a doctoral student to design, implement and deliver the project over a 12 month period. The PhD student will work closely with the Joint Remote Sensing Research Program staff based at the University of Queensland, to take the initial algorithms developed by JRSRP, and modify them for use and delivery on the Google Earth Engine for extended use to deliver reliable, accurate and transparent change and trend detection techniques, capable of delivering information about ecosystem vegetation composition, structural properties and condition, as required to meet the science and management requirements. As the algorithms and mapping results will be made available for public use, the main public link to remote sensing data sets and algorithms for research purposes in Australia is through TERN’s Auscover facility, so any algorithms, publications and links to implementation of the code in Google’s Earth Engine will be provided here.

The development work by the project team will focus on two areas of work, (1) time series analysis and (2) linked image/field data sets.
  1. The time series image processing methods will work with per-pixel, object-based and traditional time series techniques for temporally dense, spatially detailed, and large area coverage satellite image archives. The techniques developed will be applied to selected sites in terrestrial and coastal environments in Australia with recorded changes due to natural and human activities over the periods of Landsat satellite image and field data records being analysed.
  1. A number of approaches will be taken based on past methods built by the applicant’s group and other Australian researchers to establish and test methods for combining satellite image based data and ecological field survey data in terrestrial and marine environments, through calibration, assimilation and validation to map vegetation composition, structural properties and composition.

## Expected outcomes and results ##
The main outputs from this section will be time series analysis algorithms able to be run on GEE, along with key calibration and validation data sets collected and stored on GEE, as follows:
  1. time series analysis tools applicable to long term, and temporally dense satellite image archives; and
  1. an operational method to derive linked image/field data sets, for improved and validated satellite image biophysical maps of Australian vegetation composition, structure and condition variables.

Both outputs will be published in papers and available as fully documented code with instructions for use on publically accessible environmental data portals, e.g. TERN and Google’s Earth Engine. The outputs here will enable the firsts step in the significant step change requited for linking field and satellite image data to assess types of environmental change.
